---
title: "Global Intensive to Uganda Day 00: Wait, what? and Getting There"
categories:
  - COEN3050
  - Uganda
---

I'm not quite sure how to introduce this topic in a super meaningful or constructive
way. I thought about describing some sort of moment of conflict in great detail
and then turning to the camera and saying:

> So you're probably wondering how I got here?

but that might be a bit too cliché. I've also thought about describing a moment of
humor, such as when I arrived at the terminal for my first layover on this trip
and was greeted with Céline Dion's *All by Myself*. At this point though I
think I'm just going to be blunt about what's going on and then we can go from there.

**During the two weeks from May 12th (today) to May 25th, I will be traveling
on a Global Intensive trip for the University of Colorado Boulder
[Engineering Leadership Program (ELP)](https://www.colorado.edu/engineeringleadershipprogram/)
course COEN3050: Complex Leadership Challenges.** A group of about fifteen of
us are going to Uganda and Rwanda to connect with and learn from various groups of
people and organizations, with the goal being to develop relationships and gain
a greater understanding of the complex challenges facing the region.

Everyone who I've talked with about this trip has always asked something along
the lines of: "Oh so is this for Engineers without Borders?" We have a fairly
large chapter of EWB on the CU Boulder campus, and I was the team secretary
for the Puerto Rico team this past year, so I can see how that idea could be
planted. But nope, we aren't going to Uganda or Rwanda to fix anything, we are
going there to meet people and share culture, which I think is a super
important distinction to make right up front. The idea here is to get out
of the engineering mindset of just identifying and solving problems without
first understanding the complex contextual dynamics in which these problems
live.

## Wait, so why am I reading this?

I am making it my goal for the next two weeks to write everyday about what
I'm learning and doing during this trip for the following reasons:

1. Aide in self-reflection and the learning process.
1. Spread what I'm learning so others may learn it for themselves too.
1. Help others who are preparing for or are considering studying abroad.
1. Work on writing capabilities and time management.

I have no idea how this is going to go, or whether or not I'll even be able
to do this daily, but hey we might as well give it a shot. Any feedback or
suggestions are greatly appreciated, so feel free to reach out to me at
<learnitall0@gmail.com>.

I know that reading some blog post does not do a trip any justice, but I also
know that we're going to be learning some pretty important concepts that
should be spread. I feel that if I share my experience, it could inspire others
to go on a similar experience or to take some of these ideas and think about them.

> By the way, this post is WAY longer than the other posts are going to be. I
> just have a lot of airtime to fill right now.

## Wait, what is COEN3050?

In essence, the course entails picking a complex issue, such as climate
change, holistic medicine, stress in school, or (in my case) cybersecurity,
and then researching it from a variety of different perspectives throughout the
semester. Each week we took a look at our issue through a different lens and
created some sort of deliverable to convey the information we learned, whether
it was a presentation, essay, visual graphic, etc. Then throughout the semester
we continually revised each deliverable. For instance, here is the timeline for
assignments:

* Monday: Lens assigned
* Friday: First draft of lens due, peer review session
* Sunday: Second draft of lens due for TA review
* Two-ish weeks later: Third draft of lens due for professor review
* Anytime until end of semester: Forth to ∞-ith draft for additional professor
  review, if needed/wanted.

> To see what the class is all about, feel free to check out my
> [ePortfolio](https://sites.google.com/colorado.edu/ryandrew-coen3050eportfolio/home)
> for the course, which includes a syllabus and assignments.

If you're a student at CU Boulder and are considering this course, I give
it my fullest recommendation. You can take it as a freshman, I did, and yes
it does pay off:

* The **iterative** approach pushes yourself to go beyond what you thought was
  your best.
* The **peer support** opportunities are great for learning how to give and
  receive feedback from *colleagues* rather than mentors.
* You get to spend a whole semester **exploring** a topic you love, and hear from
  others doing the same.

The trip portion of this class is a one credit-hour 'add-on' as a
[Global Intensive](https://abroad.colorado.edu/index.cfm?FuseAction=Abroad.ViewLink&Parent_ID=6E207A44-D273-316A-BAEBFEE529B42886&Link_ID=D158F47C-5056-BA1F-749E3AE3F86AC5E8).

Alright, with all the introductions out of the way, let's get into Day00.

## Day00: Getting There

Getting approval to travel to Uganda is quite a process, and as being someone
who has only traveled out of the country once, there was a lot to learn in
terms of how to travel successfully. Here's what I've learned so far:

### Vaccinations and Meds

If you want to travel to Uganda, you'll need the following vaccinations:

* **Yellow Fever:** Pain rating: less than flu / 10
* **Typhoid:** I took four pills over the course of a week, so 0 / 10
* **Cholera:** A cup of liquid you drink on an empty stomach, the thing
  tasted like a glass of seawater mixed with alk-seltzer and vinegar, so 11/10
* **Tetanus:** Yeah not bad, less than flu / 10
* **Dorm Vaccines:** Basically, if you need the vaccine to live in the dorms
  at a university, you will probably also need it to travel (things like Hep
  A, etc.).

For medications:

* **Normal medications you'd take anyways:** I take meds for seasonal allergies.
* **Malaria:** Daily pill that must be taken everyday *at the same time*, two days
  before traveling to an area with Malaria and seven days after. Giving this a
  pain rating of 4/10 because takes a lot of coordination and planning to
  do this right, something that I didn't do well.
* **Traveler's Diarrhea:** Prescription anti-botics in case of stomach troubles.
* **Ibuprofen:** It's recommended, just in case.

To take care of all this, I went to Passport Health. My doctor redirected me
to them and they walked me through everything I'd need to get/know. They are very
detailed and have lots of experience in this, so I'd recommend going with all
their recommendations.

I say this because when I was receiving my consultation there was this couple
in the lobby that whispered to me (something along the lines of) *'Don't let them
scam you, they try to upcharge you on everything!'* After hearing this, I became
super aware of the fact that this could very well be a possibility, since I had no
experience with international travel and therefore wouldn't be able to tell
the difference between *"You should take this just in case"* and *"Hey you should
buy this so we can make more money"*. And for a bit at first during the consultation
I did feel like I was being taken advantage of because I was given a pretty
brief/fast overview of the vaccines and then asked to sign something, which
always feels like a red flag.

I felt comfortable enough though to ask the nurse there about it and honestly
let her know what I was thinking and feeling. She said she felt uncomfortable
and shocked, for she didn't want me to feel uncomfortable myself and
she had 15+ years experience in helping people travel internationally, so she
wasn't sure where that could have stemmed from. As soon as she said this to me,
her smile instantly became so much more friendly. I realized that I had distorted
my reality based on a very real and valid fear. I was afraid of being scammed
and being taken advantage of because I lacked the background knowledge to feel
protected, so I assumed I was in danger, which isn't fair to either myself or
the nurse who was just trying to help. Being this fear into the open allowed
it to dissipate.

### Research

Before traveling, our group had to put together a bit of a research document
on different aspects of Uganda and Rwanda that would be important and/or
beneficial to know, such as history, overview of sites we are visiting,
government, economy, etc. We want to try to get familiar with the areas we
are visiting so when we get there we have more background information we can
use to help aide in asking questions and understanding what we are experiencing.

### Flights

To get to Africa and back I am on six flights, with about 26 hours on the plane
and 50 or so hours in layovers. It's a lot of time, and so far I've used it to
write this and watch *Spider-Man: Homecoming*. In fact, right now I'm over
the Atlantic ocean just typing away with a blanket over my head.

Here are some things that I struggled with while getting tickets:

Waiting until the last minute to get a flight is not a good idea. I pushed it
probably until the last minute to book flights, and luckily was able to find
some great deals with the help of a close and talented friend. It was a scary process
however. Taking the time to be prepared and ahead of schedule is way
better than taking the time to catch up, even if it all takes the same amount
of time, because you'll be able to feel comfortable, have more time in case
things go wrong and have a nice peace of mind. But, easier said than done.

Google Flights is a pretty great tool in being able to find deals and see
available options, but of course there are lots of other tools out there. Also,
while booking flights online make sure that you read each web page fully. From what
I experienced, airlines will work you through a series of screens where you can
confirm your flight, set luggage, pick a seat, etc. but sometimes these pages
can be designed in a way that try to get you to pay for more than you want or
sometimes need. For instance, on the 'pick a seat page' you'll actually get charged
for picking a seat even if it is presented as a necessary step in the process.
You can just hit 'next' to get a random seat assignment for free. Plus, sometimes
bundle deals can be a bit misleading.

Ummmm, let's see, oh also, don't forget when your flight is. I made the mistake
of thinking my flight was on a Saturday rather than a Sunday for some reason,
weird how the brain works.

### On Foot

Every now and then, as we all do, I tend to get a bit stressed out or
overwhelmed. Traveling to new places all the time in a time-sensitive context
can amplify this. I've come up with a nifty anagram for helping to remember
some tips that have helped me stay relaxed on the road:

**enffatEyaB eo dhyrHLnlti Dkwnoutoer o lst  orjs taenreaanidenaV**

* **Breath:** If you start getting overwhelmed or start feeling some negative
  thoughts coming on, try and focus on your breath. Allows you to more easily
  listen to your thoughts and observe them. Takes some time to get comfortable
  with though, might take some practice. Also, what else are you going to do,
  like, not breathe?
* **Drink water and Eat Food:** Treat yourself and take care of your body. Being
  dehydrated and hungry while trying to focus is super hard. Be sure to also
  stay aware of your body's needs, as with the changing time zones your normal
  eating routine will get all messed up.
* **Enjoy yourself:** Hey you're traveling somewhere you don't get to go
  often. Take the time have some fun and be grateful for the experience. Meeting
  new people and spending time with your group, while having some downtime to
  explore on your own, are some great ways to do this.
* **Listen to Van Halen:** And Jam. Jam like nobody is watching. Or hey if you
  got a different jam, then do your thing. Or if you don't feel like listening
  to music then you do you. I'm just listening to Van Halen right now over
  the Atlantic Ocean and am super hyped.


```python
#!/bin/env python3
# -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
"""
dumb_anagram.py: Create a quote-on-quote anagram by taking characters
from a given list of words and rearranging them.

This can be made into a one-liner for those who are itching to play
some golf.
"""
import random


def anagramize(word_list):
    """
    Join given list of words together and randomize order of characters.

    :param list word_list: List of words to create dumb anagram of
    :return: Anagram built from `word_list`
    :rtype: string
    """

    # Combine list of words and split by char
    w = list("".join(word_list))
    # Random.shuffle modifies list in place
    random.shuffle(w)

    # Combine chars back to a single string, then remove double+ spaces
    return "".join(w)


def create_travel_anagram():
    """
    Construct a dumb anagram out of travel tips.

    :rtype: string
    """

    words = [
        "Breath",
        "Drink water and eat food",
        "Listen to Van Halen",
        "Enjoy yourself"
    ]

    return anagramize(words)


if __name__ == '__main__':
    print(create_travel_anagram())

```

### Wait, that's a wrap?

If there are any other parts to this portion of the travel experience
that you want me to write out, just reach out and I'll add it. I tried to cover
the main bits of what this process entailed, which is preparation for flights,
booking flights and traveling, but there's so much that went into this I couldn't
cover anything. The group will be in Uganda tomorrow, so in the next post I'll
touch on that a bit.
