---
title: "Global Intensive to Uganda Day 01: Snake Plane"
categories:
  - COEN3050
  - Uganda
---

> In this post I am going to act like I'm writing this on the night of the
> 13th, but really I'm writing this the morning of the 14th- don't even worry
> about it dude.

In yesterday's post I was writing on the plane, having published while we
were in Belgium. Now after another 10+ hour flight and an hour+ car ride,
I am sitting at our beautiful home in Kampala, Uganda. After a two day, bumpy
journey from Colorado, we are all finally here.

Well, OK, when I say *all* I really mean all of the kids in our group- our
professor's flight from the states into Belgium was delayed an hour, so she
missed her final layover. We should see her sometime tomorrow though.

I am not quite sure when yesterday turned into today, as I've been through a
couple time zones and didn't try too hard to keep track of what was going on
in that department, but I think it would be appropriate to begin today's story
at the Brussels airport. That seems like a good place to continue a *To be
continued...*.

Everything on the flight from the states over to Brussels went pretty well,
other than the fact that I didn't get too much sleep and my legs felt super
stiff afterwards. We were given nice blankets and a pillow, dinner, breakfast,
free entertainment (I played a lot of games on those little screens they have
on the seats in front of you). Other than feeling stuck and debating for 30
minutes whether or not it was a good time to pee on a couple of separate
occasions, all went smoothly.

We got into Brussels and took a bus straight to our next terminal. We had about
an hour to ourselves to just catch up on the flight and prepare for the next
leg, which was equivalent to traveling from the Canadian border to the Mexican
border all in one go.

I had never been to Europe before, so it was super cool to see the subtle
differences between an airport there versus the states. For instance, TVs
played highlight reels of Football instead of Football, stalls in the bathroom
were tiny rooms with real doors rather than plastic cubicles, and, this is the
real kicker, there was beer. We all had a glass of draft Jupiler beer for around
$5 each and although it tasted like a beer you'd find at an airport, it was pretty
darn refreshing. No ID checks, no strange looks, just *Is that all?* In fact,
I don't know if this happens back in the states, but they gave you an actual
glass and trusted you to bring it back when you were finished. You were treated
like an adult rather than a thief straight off from the get-go.

After having a glass, (and buying a condom from the vending machine in the bathroom
with this cartoon penis wearing a baseball cap on the packaging, which made me
giggle), we began boarding. The seating area over by the terminal was segmented
into two different seating sections: people who board the plane first and people
who board the plane second, all based on row assignment. If you had a row
past something like 40, then you got to board first, and if you didn't then
you had to wait your turn.

What I think is interesting about this was there were a couple brief disputes
over this situation between passengers and airport staff. And when I say
brief, I mean there was a start and there was an end- no middle ground, just
a swift end brought on by airport staff. Here's what I mean:

1. **Background Info:** Limiting seating and crowding in one section.
1. **Start:** Man moves over to the other side in order to get a seat, so he
   doesn't have to stand.
1. **End:** *Can I see your boarding pass? Ok, so you have to sit over there. We
   do this separation for a reason so please respect it, thank you.*

Or another case with a bit more falling action:

1. **Background Info:** We began boarding and the first section was filling into
   the plane.
1. **Start:** This dude tries to swiftly leave the second section that wasn't boarding
   to try and board the plane.
1. **End:** *Excuse me sir, but you must wait to board.*
1. **Falling action:** *Sorry, so sorry.*

The moral awareness of those interactions was crazy in comparison to the states.
No arguing, no need for revenge, just acknowledgement of being in the wrong
and moving on.

How strange.

After that, everything was pretty normal until lunch, when things really started
to pick up. I was getting kind of bored just traveling internationally, so I was
super grateful that I ate something for lunch that put me straight on my ass for
the rest of the flight. Here's what I had for lunch:

* A dish with beef, potatoes, carrots and peas
* Mixed vegetables
* Cheese
* Glass of white wine (yes, that's right, I asked for and they gave me wine
  on the plane without asking for my ID).

Everything was fine until the last bite, when all of a sudden I got a huge
lump in my throat. I had difficulty swallowing and pain shooting up and down
my esophagus. Now, being someone who is allergic to tree nuts and peanuts, and
having the power to land a plane as a result, I got a bit worried. I didn't want
to inconvenience all these people and I have been in "boy who cried wolf"
situation before, so I decided to wait it out and see what happened. I closed
my eyes, had some water, and tried to be super mindful about what I was feeling
and where.

What a journey.

As time went on I got dizzy and my stomach started to become upset. I couldn't
focus and for a while just stared at the wall in front of me. I tried napping,
but then received a bloody nose from the dry air. All while flying over sand
in Northern Africa.

After an hour, the pain started subsiding but transformed into this weird
situation where I had to start consciously thinking about swallowing my spit. My
mouth was watering like crazy but swallowing created pulsating pain that felt
like intense yet soft/rounded out heartburn. I went to the bathroom to try and
deal with things and almost threw up three times. That was the worst point of
it all.

My mind began racing in that bathroom with thoughts of regret and homesickness,
just wanting to be in my own bed with a nice glass of water and a nap. I was
scared and felt isolated, stuck and lost. I had to become mindful of these
thoughts, accept them for what they were and then accept the situation I was in.
This helped me calm down and start to even laugh at what was going on. I was
living through one of my darkest fears and although I felt horrible, I was
still there.

With time the pain subsided and a close friend of mine on the trip checked in
on me, gave me some stomach-ibuprofen as she put, and eventually we were all good.
I'm still feeling a bit sore in my throat, but it's not *mess you up* kind of
pain.

I took a nap, did some coding on some stupid little Python project I'll probably
mention later on in the next week or two, talked for an hour with a professor
of reproductive physiology to my right (what a guy), and we landed. We dealt
with some brief hiccups in customs:

* Someone in our group took some wine (*cough three glasses cough*) with her
  off the plane, so we were a bit concerned with how the luggage check was
  going to go.
* I had to purchase an East Africa visa, which I didn't successfully get
  before the trip.

And afterwards we met up with our host who took us on a bus from the Entebbe
airport to Kampala.

Now we're onto day two.

