---
title: "Global Intensive: Little Boxes on the Hillside"
categories:
  - COEN3050
  - Uganda
---

Walking into Dulles airport on my way home from Uganda was a moment of pure
cynicism. I remember thinking:

* What is with all this pointless artwork on the ceiling?
* OK, this montage video of" Americans" that is playing on TVs over the customs
  line is annoying.
* Why is everyone so loud?
* Why is this guy wearing a shirt that says "Hot Butts Served Daily"? What does
  that even mean?

Good to be home.

I've been back in Colorado for a little under a week now and have already forgotten
most of the specific details regarding the trip, however having the microscope
put away and being 1000 feet off the ground, I've begun to notice boxes. Lots of
boxes.

Boxes are kick-ass for building forts, but they also act as a great symbol for
conveying our life situation. Say you were tasked with filling a box with everything
that your life is. What would you put inside? What is important to you? How big
or small would your box be? You could even pretend for a second that your box
is a true, 100% accurate reflection of you and ask more difficult questions.
What would be inside your box that you are afraid of seeing? What would be inside
your box that you are proud of? What would be inside your box that you didn't
even know was there?

As human beings, it is our responsibility to ourselves and to one another to understand
and accept what's in our box, yet doing so requires going out of our way to try
our best to understand what's in other boxes that are completely different than
our own. Getting out of our own [epistemic bubbles and echo chambers](https://aeon.co/essays/why-its-as-hard-to-escape-an-echo-chamber-as-it-is-to-flee-a-cult)
can be one of the hardest things that we do, yet only when we have made an effort
to get uncomfortable and reach outside of our box can we then know how our box
impacts ourselves and others.

Personally, my box is filled with suburban white comfort. I have Legos with the
words 'future', 'career' and 'purpose' written on them that I build with everyday.
The words 'bias', 'guilt', 'privilege' and 'rich' cover each wall of my box, as
if Bart Simpson wrote them there in detention after school. A quiet laughing
track plays in the background constantly and the silhouettes of my peers peek down
at me through the open ceiling. In the center of my box though is this closed-off
and dark room of distraction and isolation, containing a couch, Netflix, my phone
and food and water where I spend most of my time.

I was a tourist in Uganda for about two weeks and now I've been back home in
Colorado for a little less than a week. Being taken outside of my box and then
thrown back in has been one of the most uncomfortable yet eye-opening experiences
of my life.

While I was in Uganda I learned that I had enough cash in my backpack to pay for
a semester of someone's tuition, and that the whole trip cost could've provided
for three people's entire undergrad degree. I visited places where people faced
challenges that I had never even had to think about, such as the availability
of clean water, food and sanitary products. Yet everywhere I went I met inspiring
people living truly intentional lives filled with purpose and fruition, which is
something that I have had to think about everyday.

I came face to face with the guilt of my privilege and was met with the fact that
I should not be guilty of it at all. I should only feel guilty for not accepting
my life for what it is and not living it how I want to live it: philanthropically.
No matter how much guilt I may feel, I have been given privilege and it is now
up to me to use it purposefully.

So in conclusion I leave you with this weird, abstract sentence to ponder:

> The value that we place on other peoples' boxes is only relative to the value
> we place on our own box, however, the true value of a box has nothing to do with
> the box itself and rather, has everything to do with the person who lives inside
> of it.
>
> Therefore, remember to love.

Oh BTW the title is a reference to a show called [*Weeds*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weeds_%28TV_series%29).
I'd definitely give it a peek- it's on Netflix.

