---
title: "Global Intensive to Uganda Day 02: Mzungu"
categories:
  - COEN3050
  - Uganda
---

> Again in this post I am going to act like I'm writing this on the night of
> the 14th, but really I'm writing this the morning of the 15th- don't even
> worry about it dude.

I just want to say first and foremost that today is really difficult to put
into words. I have considered just not saying anything at all, you know the whole
*don't do it if you can't do it right* approach, but I think that sharing
this experience and writing about this experience is still going to be a worthy
endeavor. Right now I feel lost, confused and overwhelmed, which is good because
that's the whole point of this trip, so if I don't have a straight conclusion
or big, overarching takeaway, it's because there just isn't one yet. And that's
something I've learned to accept as being OK.

## Morning

The day started off with a community breakfast over some local dishes, which
were incredible. You'd think that anything would taste good after living on an
airplane for a couple days, but holy shit it was delicious. We had these huge
plantains that were 2-3 times as big as the bananas back home, this sausage meat
that could be compared to a fried hot dog and a burrito-esk food called a 'rolex',
which was eggs wrapped in a fried bread similar to a crepe. There was also
local tea and hot chocolate which we enjoyed thoroughly.

After/while we were eating, we talked with our guides for the trip, going through
introductions and doing some individual and team goal setting. I for instance had
shared my personal goal of working on developing close relationships with others
and being comfortable feeling vulnerable around people I am getting to know. As
a group, we talked about the "Listen, Think, Act" mantra from the program we were
staying with, making the point to know that right now we were just trying to
do our best to listen and think about what we were going to see.

Ten minutes after breakfast we were on an bus and off on our day. We took a ride
through the city of Kimpala and had a discussion surrounding local economic class
groupings and the education system, which was lead by one of our guides who had
grown up and was living in the region. What we talked about, and visibly saw during
our ride, was a large discrepancy between those with money and those without,
displaying a lack of a middle class almost entirely.

We started in an area with large houses with 15 foot fences laced with barbed wire,
providing space for three people, and we ended our ride in an area where eight
people were living and working out of a small, single roomed shelter. Our destination
was the Katanga slums, an area within the city housing about 1,500 - 2,000 people.

As soon as we stepped foot in the area we were identified. People around us
were calling out *Mzungu, Mzungu*, which essentially means 'rich white person'.
Our status, wealth and education is all assumed from our skin color. All eyes
were on our little group as we walked to meet with the local board of the village.

Each slum has a board of volunteers who help facilitate residency. Positions are
elected and campaigned for, with each member having a specific function for the
community. They resolve local conflicts, interact with the surrounding government
and work to create as hospitable of an environment for their people that they can.
They aren't paid, yet work essentially 24/7 for the sake of helping their community,
maintaining a part-time job on the side. When we arrived we had to meet with the
leader of the village, essentially a mayor, which is a formality that anyone who
wants to do anything within the village must do.

When we entered into the single-roomed office building containing a desk, bench
and couple of chairs, there were already some members of the community in there
trying to resolve a conflict. They were speaking in a local dialect, but later
on we learned that the argument was between a husband and his girlfriend or wife,
for he was refusing to pay to feed her. We hadn't of known at the time that it
was even an argument though because there was no shouting or escalated voices.

The leader of the slum described their situation, going over the water and pollution
problems they were facing. He asked us to keep the community in our hearts, since
most of the help that they receive comes from outside organizations such as American
NGOs. Additionally though, he talked about how *"Ugandan's know what's best for
Ugandans"*, making reference to fact that so many outside people come to try
and help, yet end up being unsuccessful or inefficient because they don't address
the true needs of the community.

We ended with discussion of what we might expect as we walked through the area.
He stated that although the people there were suffering, we would be greeted with
smiles and warmth. Ugandans are extremely hospitable and this welcoming nature
is something that is nurtured from a young age.

> It was like a parade.

People who were living in the clearly difficult situations just stopped, smiled
and waved to us. Children were especially friendly due to their curiosity.
When we walked out of our meeting with the board, we were swarmed with 20+ children
who started hugging our legs, touching our skin and hair, asking for our names
and holding our hands as we walked. And as we walked children would come and go,
holding our fingers with their small, gentle hands.

I was so stunned and overwhelmed by what we saw, that I stopped functioning properly.
In those moments I truly forgot how to human.

We saw uneven paths and people working out of the fronts of their already small
homes. Clothes were drying over the paths, requiring ducking and weaving as we moved
through the small, winding paths. The children were in sandals, Crocs or were
barefoot. Babies were taking baths in small buckets and there wasn't a drop of
clean water in sight. There was once a clean water spring that used to provide
water for the area, but a large hotel that was built right next door had connected
their sewage line to it.

In the middle of the village there was a large, polluted trench with wooden logs
placed over it as a bridge. The slum is inbetween two large hills, with one hill
holding Makerere University and the other holding the city's hospital. When
it rains, the water flows down from these areas and floods the slum, bringing
trash into peoples' homes.

I was wearing a shirt with an old CU logo from the 70s or 80s that had a
picture of a buffalo on the front. A man pointed to my shirt and started
intimidating a buffalo and all I could do was smile and laugh with him because
I didn't know what to do. He gave me a fist bump as I walked away. A child later
came up to me and slowly grabbed the water bottle out of my hand and
took a good long drink, handing it back when he was finished.

Probably the most difficult aspect to this was the fact that we were able to
leave. Our brief walking tour, or what felt like an inappropriate, intrusive
parade, wasn't even a taste of what life in the slums was like. But, it got our
foot in to start the process of listening and thinking.

There's just so much to think about. The only way I can describe this feeling
is as if you are trying to balance scales in an environment without gravity: no
matter how much you try to touch the scales and find balance, the scales will
always keep moving.

After leaving the slums we crossed the street and visited a business known
as *Thread of Life*, which employs about 150 women and teaches them to make
clothing they can sell. They receive no help from the government. We had the
opportunity to have a conversation with a coordinator at the organization, who
is a single mom with three kids. Before coming to *Thread of Life* eight years
ago, she was living in the streets.

We bought some articles of clothing from her, said our thank you's and goodbyes,
then headed to lunch. This is where the idea of balance really hits hard.

## Afternoon

We had lunch at Makerere University, which was established in Kimpala a century
ago. We ate, went over some events of the morning in casual conversation trying
to debrief, and then took a walking tour of the university.

I can't quite remember all the details of how the education system works in
Uganda, but it is a bit similar to the one back in the states. Essentially you
have primary school, secondary school and university, moving between them based
on performance in national exams, with scores compared district wide. If you score
well on your national placement test for university, then you could be eligible
to receive full or partial government sponsorship. A university class costs
$150-200 a semester.

There are some students going to the university who live in the slums because
that is the only housing they can afford.

One thing that became super clear during our tour was the sense of brotherhood
built into the culture of the university. It is built on the foundational ideals
of acceptance and using the knowledge gained to give back, reminding me entirely
of CU Boulder, however there was an element to it that was just so much more
authentic. These weren't ideals that the university proclaims and tries to
teach, they were ideals that every student at the university upholds.

Near the end of our tour we were able to see their College of Engineering, Design,
Art and Technology, which was purposeful given that 95% of the group are earning
engineering degrees. We felt super connected during this part of the tour,
seeing all of the similar equipment and course content that members of the
group were studying back home. As an example, there was an electrical engineering
classroom which had labstations with the same equipment as those of the labstations
in the Integrated Teaching and Learning Laboratory (ITLL) at UCB. A senior
in our group had also stated that their freshman were learning material that not
even our senior's at UCB knew.

What really caught my eye personally was *netLabs|UG*, a collection of masters
students doing work with machine learning, IP routing and some other sweet disciplines.
The room was the most air conditioned place we have experienced so far on this
trip, and had a couple server racks, CIS Controls posters and Cisco boxes lining
the walls. I wanted to jump right in with them and just start a discussion about
what they were working on, but I was a bit too shy to say anything.

The entire building was covered in a thick layer of dust, (covers were
put over equipment to protect them), furniture was fairly run down and it was
pretty darn hot and humid. The conditions of the college would cause a lot of
complaining within the Boulder community, yet these students were so grateful
and excited about their work.

We exchanged contact information and then parted ways for home base. After a
power nap, we were off to dinner.

## Night

Dinner that night was an incredible experience. We walked over to this restaurant
and sat outside under the night sky, candles providing light for our table. We
cracked open some local beers and just talked amongst friends, sharing and
laughing and learning with one another in the cool breeze.

The food did take quite a while to arrive, but after giving it some thought we
realized that we didn't mind at all. By waiting for our food, our travel group
came closer together as a community over the interesting conversations we partook
in. We had a chance to relax and just share our thoughts, and therefore ourselves,
after a big day of difficult to digest events. The environment was open and honest,
making all worries of appearance or 'fitting in' dissipate.

The food supported this idea- we were given huge, circular plates that had a layer
of this local, sponge-y, acidic bread with our meals placed on top. No silverware
or individual plates were provided, as eating involved ripping off a piece of
the bread, wrapping food inside and then going to town. Three of us had shared
dishes of beef and goat ribs and the whole table passed food around to try a
taste of everything ordered.

Afterwards, we walked back, talked for an hour or two, then passed out like rocks.

Onto day three.

